                                         EXPLANATORY STATEMENT

        Issued by the authority of the Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards
                                                     Commission

                              National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013

         National Disability Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality Auditors) Rules 2025

Purpose

The National Disability Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality Auditors) Rules 2025 (the
Instrument) is made under sections 73U and 209 of the National Disability Insurance
Scheme Act 2013 (the Act).

This Instrument sets out conditions and requirements governing the approval of an approved
quality auditor (AQA) under the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS), with the
purpose of promoting and safeguarding the quality and integrity of NDIS audits.

In particular, this Instrument sets out the matters to which the Commissioner of the NDIS
Quality and Safeguards Commission (Commissioner) must or may have regard to, in
deciding whether to: give, or refuse to give, an approval as an AQA; whether or not to make
an approval that is subject to conditions; and, whether or not to revoke an approval. This
Instrument also sets out conditions that apply to the approval of all AQAs, which continue to
apply until an approval is varied or revoked.

Together with the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality Auditors
Scheme) Guidelines 2018, this Instrument establishes the Approved Quality Auditor Scheme
(AQA Scheme). The AQA Scheme provides the framework for quality audits under the NDIS
and sets out requirements on AQAs when undertaking quality audits of prospective and
current registered NDIS providers.

Background

The NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission (Commission) oversees a single national
registration and regulatory system for NDIS providers of supports and services to NDIS
participants which sets a consistent approach to quality. An important aspect of NDIS
provider registration is the quality audits of prospective and registered NDIS providers
against all applicable standards and requirements prescribed by the NDIS Practice
Standards. These quality audits help to protect the rights and safety of people with disability
by providing independent assessments that help ensure that only providers who meet
required standards are registered as registered NDIS providers.

The Commissioner's functions include the approval of AQAs and oversight of the quality
audits they undertake under the Act. AQAs perform critical quality audit activities and make
recommendations and findings to:

    · satisfy the requirement in section 73E(1)(c) of the Act in determining an application
         for registration;

    · inform decisions about the ongoing registration of a registered NDIS provider, as well
         as their compliance with the NDIS Practice Standards; and

                                                                                                                                       1

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
    · inform the NDIS Commission of quality and safeguarding risks in the NDIS market,
         including the capability of NDIS providers and their workforce to deliver quality and
         safe NDIS supports and services to people with disability.

The National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back of Track No.
1) Act 2024 introduced key quality and safeguarding reforms including new powers to make
NDIS rules in relation to approved quality auditors to enhance participant protection and the
quality and integrity of auditing within the NDIS.

The strengthening of the quality and integrity of auditing within the NDIS is consistent with
the findings and recommendations made by Independent Review into the National Disability
Insurance Scheme in relation to risk-based registration of NDIS providers.

This Instrument supports the effective operation of the NDIS by setting out the requirements
governing the approval of AQAs under the NDIS.

Section 209 of the Act provides that the Minister may, by legislative instrument, make rules
(NDIS rules) prescribing matters required or permitted by this Act to be prescribed or which
are necessary or convenient to be prescribed in order to carry out or give effect to the Act.

Subsection 201A(1) of the Act provides that the Minister may delegate to the Commissioner
the Minister's powers under section 209 of the Act to make NDIS rules, including NDIS rules
made for the purposes of subsections 73U(4A) and (9A) of the Act. The Minister has
delegated this power to the Commissioner.

Subsection 73U(1) of the Act provides that the Commissioner may approve a person or body
to become an AQA in the NDIS.

Subsection 73U(4A) of the Act provides that NDIS rules may specify conditions of the
approval for a person or body to become an approved quality auditor.

Subsection 73U(9A) of the Act provides that NDIS rules prescribe requirements with which
the Commissioner must comply, criteria that the Commissioner is to apply, or matters to
which the Commissioner may, must or must not have regard to, in deciding whether to give,
or refuse to give, an approval as an AQA, whether or not to make an approval that is subject
to conditions, and, whether or not to vary or revoke an approval.

In making this Instrument, the Commissioner has had regard to the objects and principles of
the Act and the need to ensure the financial sustainability of the NDIS, as required by
subsection 209(3) of the Act.

The Instrument is a legislative instrument for the purposes of the Legislation Act 2003 and is
an NDIS rule for the purposes of section 209 of the Act.

Commencement

The Instrument commences the day after it is registered on the Federal Register of
Legislation.

                                                                                                                                       2

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
Consultation

Section 209 of the Act provides that NDIS rules fall into four categories. Subsection 209(8) of
the Act provides that certain categories of NDIS rules are `Category D' rules. Category D
rules include rules made for the purposes of subsections 73U(4A) and (9A) of the Act.

Under subsection 209(7) of the Act, Category D rules cannot be made under subsection
209(1) unless each host jurisdiction (states and territories) has been consulted in relation to
the making of those rules. In compliance with this requirement, prior to making the
Instrument the Commissioner (as the Minister's delegate) consulted all states and territories
in relation to the making of this instrument. All states and territories have had the opportunity
to review this Instrument and provide comments and feedback.

In making the Instrument, the Commissioner has also undertaken a targeted consultation
process with AQAs and the Joint Accreditation System of Australia and New Zealand
(JASANZ), the body responsible for the accreditation of a certification body against the AQA
Scheme.

Close consultation was also undertaken with the Department of Health, Disability and
Ageing.

Impact Analysis Statement

The Office of Impact Assessment has advised that the proposed amendments do not require
detailed Impact Analysis (OIA ID: OIA25-09693).

Documents incorporated by reference

Section 4 of the Instrument incorporates by reference the National Disability Insurance
Scheme (Approved Quality Auditors Scheme) Guidelines 2018, as existing from time to time.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality Auditors Scheme) Guidelines
2018 are freely available on the Federal Register of Legislation
(https://www.legislation.gov.au/F2018N00114).

Subsection 209(2) of the Act provides authority to incorporate the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality Auditors Scheme) Guidelines 2018, as existing from
time to time, despite subsection 14(2) of the Legislation Act 2003.

Explanation of the provisions

Part 1 ­ Preliminary

Section 1 - Name

Section 1 provides that the Instrument is titled the National Disability Insurance Scheme
(Approved Quality Auditors) Rules 2025.

Section 2 ­ Commencement

Section 2 provides that the whole of the Instrument commences on the day after the
instrument is registered.

                                                                                                                                       3

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
Section 3 ­ Authority

Section 3 provides that the Instrument is made under the National Disability Insurance
Scheme Act 2013.

Section 4 ­ Definitions

Section 4 provides the definitions for terms used in the Instrument.

A legislative note provides a number of expressions used in the instrument are defined in
section 9 of the NDIS Act, including:

    · "approved quality auditor";
    · "banning order";
    · "Commission";
    · "Commissioner";
    · "key personnel".

Section 4 also provides that in the Instrument, a reference to the following terms, have the
following meanings:

Act means the National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013.

applicant means a person or body who has made a request to be approved as an AQA
under section 73U of the Act.

AQA means a person or body approved by the Commissioner as under section 73U.

AQA Code of Conduct means the Code of Conduct contained in Annex A of the AQA
Guidelines.

AQA Guidelines means the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality
Auditors Scheme) Guidelines 2018 (as existing from time to time).

auditor means a person employed, contracted or otherwise engaged by the AQA to conduct
an audit. An auditor includes an auditor-in-training and an audit team leader.

certification body means a body that has received JASANZ accreditation towards
becoming an AQA.

JASANZ means the Joint Accreditation System of Australia and New Zealand being the
body responsible for the accreditation of a certification body.

JASANZ accreditation has the same meaning as in the AQA Guidelines (as existing from
time to time).

Part 2 ­ Matters to which the Commissioner must or may have regard

Section 5 ­ Purpose of this Part

Section 5 provides that Part 2 of this Instrument is made for the purposes of subsection
73U(9A) of the Act. Part 2 of the Instrument sets out the matters to which the Commissioner
must or may have regard in deciding whether to give, or refuse to give, an approval under

                                                                                                                                       4

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
subsection 73U(1) of the Act; whether or not to make an approval given under subsection
73U(1) of the Act subject to conditions; and whether or not to revoke an approval given
under subsection 73U(1) of the Act.

These matters are consistent with the matters that were previously embedded in the AQA
Guidelines.

The matters listed in this Part provide guidance on the expectations for AQAs by setting out
factors that must or may be considered by the Commissioner when making decisions on the
approval and revocation of approval as an AQA.

Section 6 ­ Matters to which the Commissioner must have regard when giving or refusing an
approval as an AQA

Section 6 sets out the matters to which the Commissioner must have regard to in deciding
whether to give, or refuse to give, an approval under subsection 73U(1) of the Act.

Subsection 6(1) provides that this section is made for the purposes of paragraph 73U(9A)(a)
of the Act. Paragraph 73U(9A)(a) of the Act provides that NDIS rules may prescribe
requirements with which the Commissioner must comply, criteria that the Commissioner is to
apply, or matters to which the Commissioner may, must or must not have regard, in deciding
whether to give, or refuse to give, an approval under subsection 73U(1) of the Act.

Subsection 6(2) sets out the matters the Commissioner must have regard to when deciding
whether to give, or refuse to give, an approval under subsection 73U(1) of the Act.

Paragraph 6(2)(a) provides that the Commissioner must have regard to whether the
applicant holds, or has held, JASANZ accreditation. This will allow the Commissioner to take
into account the applicant's capacity to meet the required professional and operational
standards for auditing including whether the applicant's accreditation has previously been
revoked.

Paragraph 6(2)(b) provides that the Commissioner must have regard to whether the
applicant has previously been approved as an AQA under subsection 73U(1) of the Act. This
will allow the Commissioner to take into account an applicant's previous behaviour and
performance as an AQA.

Paragraph 6(2)(c) provides that the Commissioner must have regard to whether a banning
order has ever been in force in relation to the applicant or any member of the applicant's key
personnel. This refers only to banning orders made under section 73ZN of the Act. Having
regard to whether a banning order has ever been in force will allow the Commissioner to
take into account whether any integrity risks are present that could affect quality and integrity
of auditing.

Paragraph 6(2)(d) provides that the Commissioner must have regard to the applicant's
experience as a certification body. This will allow the Commissioner to take into account an
applicant's previous experience performance in conducting audits.

Paragraph 6(2)(e) provides that the Commissioner must have regard to the applicant's
understanding of the NDIS. Auditing in the NDIS requires an understanding of NDIS-specific
supports and services and how the NDIS Practice Standards apply. Having regard to the

                                                                                                                                       5

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
applicant's understanding of the NDIS, including knowledge of the operation of the NDIS
Practice Standards, will allow the Commissioner to take into account whether the applicant
will likely be able to effectively undertake audits in the NDIS context.

Paragraph 6(2)(f) provides that the Commissioner must have regard to the applicant's ability
to undertake participant centred audit practice. Auditing in the NDIS involves more than an
assessment of technical or paper-based compliance with the NDIS Practice Standards.
Auditing in the NDIS requires undertaking participant centred audit practice including by
engaging with participants and assessing how provider practices impact participants'
autonomy, safety and wellbeing. Having regard to the applicant's ability to undertake
participant centred audit practice will allow the Commissioner to take into account whether
the applicant is able to undertake audits which prioritise participant outcomes, safety and
experience.

Further information on participant centred practice is available in the Principles for Audit
Reports delivered following audits undertaken in accordance with the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality Auditor Scheme) Guidelines 2018 (Commission,
2022), which provides practical examples of how this can be demonstrated in audit reports.
The guidance is available on the Commission website (https://www.ndiscommission.gov.au).

Paragraph 6(2)(g) provides that the Commissioner must have regard to any real or
perceived conflict of interest, including any mitigation strategies. This will allow the
Commissioner to take into account whether there are any conflicts of interest that may
impact the integrity and independence of audits and whether any identified conflicts of
interest will be appropriately managed.

Requiring the Commissioner to have regard to these matters supports the objective of
ensuring that only applicants that are likely to conduct audits to a high standard of quality
and integrity can be approved as an AQA. These matters are not exhaustive, and the
Commissioner may have regard to any other matters considered relevant.

Section 7 ­ Matters to which the Commissioner may have regard when making an approval
subject to conditions

Section 7 sets out the matters to which the Commissioner may have regard in deciding
whether to make an approval under subsection 73U(1) of the Act subject to conditions.

Subsection 7(1) provides that this section is made for the purposes of paragraph 73U(9A)(b)
of the Act. Paragraph 73U(9A)(b) of the Act provides that NDIS rules may prescribe
requirements with which the Commissioner must comply, criteria that the Commissioner is to
apply, or matters to which the Commissioner may, must or must not have regard, in deciding
whether or not to make an approval given under subsection 73U(1) of the Act subject to
conditions.

Subsection 7(2) sets out the matters the Commissioner may have regard to when deciding
whether or not to make an approval given under subsection 73U(1) of the Act subject to
conditions.

Paragraph 7(2)(a) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to the accreditation
status of the applicant with JASANZ. This will allow the Commissioner to consider whether

                                                                                                                                       6

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
there are any gaps in accreditation status that could be addressed through appropriate
conditions.

Paragraph 7(2)(b) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to any non-compliance
with the AQA Guidelines, including the AQA Code of Conduct. This will allow the
Commissioner to consider whether there is a history of non-compliance that may require
conditional approval.

Requiring the Commissioner to have regard to these matters protects the integrity and
quality of auditing in the NDIS and allows the Commissioner to tailor approval conditions to
address specific concerns. These matters are not exhaustive, and the Commissioner may
have regard to any other matters considered relevant.

Section 8 ­ Matters to which the Commissioner may have regard when revoking an approval
as an AQA

Section 8 sets out the matters to which the Commissioner may have regard in deciding
whether to revoke an approval given under subsection 73U(1) of the Act.

Subsection 8(1) provides that this section is made for the purposes of paragraph 73U(9A)(c)
of the Act. Paragraph 73U(9A)(c) of the Act provides that NDIS rules may prescribe
requirements with which the Commissioner must comply, criteria that the Commissioner is to
apply, or matters to which the Commissioner may, must or must not have regard, in deciding
whether to vary or revoke an approval given under subsection 73U(1) of the Act.

Subsection 8(2) sets out the matters the Commissioner may have regard to when deciding
whether to revoke an approval given under subsection 73U(1) of the Act.

Paragraph 8(2)(a) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to any non-compliance
with the AQA Guidelines, including the AQA Code of Conduct. The AQA Guidelines and
AQA Code of Conduct set out the expectations and requirements on AQAs when
undertaking audits in the NDIS. Having regard to any non-compliance with the AQA
Guidelines and AQA Code of Conduct will allow the Commissioner to assess whether
revocation of approval is necessary to help safeguard the quality and integrity of audits in the
NDIS.

Paragraph 8(2)(b) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to the AQA's conduct,
including compliance with relevant policies and standards. Having regard to the AQA's
conduct including any non-compliance with relevant policies and standards will allow the
Commissioner to assess whether revocation of approval is necessary to help safeguard the
quality and integrity of audits in the NDIS.

Paragraph 8(2)(c) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to any real or perceived
conflict of interest in respect of undertaking NDIS audits for the AQA or the AQA's key
personnel. Having regard to whether there are any conflicts of interest that may impact the
integrity and independence of audits will allow the Commissioner to assess whether
revocation of approval is necessary to help safeguard the quality and integrity of audits in the
NDIS.

Paragraph 8(2)(d) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to any information from
JASANZ in respect of the AQA's performance. The NDIS Commission engages JASANZ to

                                                                                                                                       7

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
manage and administer the AQA Scheme. JASANZ conduct accreditation of bodies seeking
to become an AQA and continue to monitor their compliance throughout their accreditation
term. Having regard to any information from JASANZ on the AQA's performance will allow
the Commissioner to assess whether revocation of approval is necessary to help safeguard
the quality and integrity of audits in the NDIS.

Paragraph 8(2)(e) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to Commission
assessments of the quality of audits and reports undertaken by the AQA. Having regard to
Commission assessments of the quality of audits and reports undertaken by the AQA will
allow the Commissioner to assess whether revocation of approval is necessary to help
safeguard the quality and integrity of audits in the NDIS.

Paragraph 8(2)(f) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to whether the AQA's
JASANZ accreditation has been suspended or revoked. JASANZ accreditation is evidence
of the AQA's capacity to meet the required professional and operational standards for
auditing. Having regard to whether JASANZ accreditation has been suspended or revoked
will allow the Commissioner to assess whether revocation of approval is necessary to help
safeguard the quality and integrity of audits in the NDIS.

Paragraph 8(2)(g) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to whether a banning
order has ever been in force in relation to the AQA or any member of the AQA's key
personnel. Having regard to whether a banning order has ever been in force in relation to the
AQA or any member of the AQA's key personnel will allow the Commissioner to assess
whether revocation of approval is necessary to help safeguard the quality and integrity of
audits in the NDIS.

Paragraph 8(2)(h) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to the AQA's
understanding of the NDIS. Having regard to the AQA's understanding of the NDIS,
including knowledge of the NDIS Practice Standards, will allow the Commissioner to assess
whether revocation of approval is necessary to help safeguard the quality and integrity of
audits in the NDIS as the AQA may not be able to effectively undertake audits in the NDIS
context.

Paragraph 8(2)(i) provides that the Commissioner may have regard to the AQA's ability to
undertake participant centred audit practice. Having regard to the applicant's ability to
undertake participant centred audit practice will allow the Commissioner to assess whether
revocation of approval is necessary to help safeguard the quality and integrity of audits in the
NDIS as the AQA may not be able to effectively undertake audits which prioritise participant
outcomes, safety and experience.

Requiring the Commissioner to have regard to these matters helps ensure that the
Commissioner is able to revoke AQAs that compromise the quality and integrity of audits in
the NDIS. These matters are not exhaustive, and the Commissioner may have regard to any
other matters considered relevant.

Part 3 ­ Conditions of approval as an AQA

Section 9 ­ Purpose of this Part

                                                                                                                                       8

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
Section 9 provides that Part 3 of this Instrument is made for the purposes of subsection
73U(4A) of the Act. Part 3 of the Instrument sets out conditions that apply to the approval of
all AQAs.
Section 10 ­ Condition to prevent employment or engagement of a person against whom a
banning order has been made
Section 10 provides that the approval of an AQA is subject to the condition that the AQA
must not employ or engage as a member of an audit team, or continue to employ or engage
as a member of an audit team, a person against whom a banning order has been made; or
have, or continue to have, such a person as a member of the AQA's key personnel. For
clarity, this includes any banning order that has been made under section 73ZN of the Act,
whether the banning order is still inforce or has expired.
Section 73U(5A) of the Act specifically authorises conditions that restrict the employment or
engagement of a person, against whom a banning order has been made, by an AQA and
require the AQA to not have, or continue to have, a person against whom a banning order
has been made as member of their key personnel.
Imposing a condition requiring an AQA not to employ or engage a person against whom a
banning order has been made helps prevent banned persons from being able to move from
the NDIS provider sector of the NDIS market system to the NDIS auditing sector and
continue to engage in activities that had them banned from the provider market.
Section 11 ­ Condition to ensure compliance with the Code of Conduct for AQAs
Section 11 provides that the approval of an AQA must ensure that they and all of their
auditors and personnel comply with the AQA Code of Conduct.
Imposing compliance with the AQA Code of Conduct helps safeguard the quality and
integrity of audits in the NDIS. The AQA Code of Conduct sets out core requirements
relating to expected conduct and behaviour. Compliance with the AQA Code of Conduct is
also required under the AQA Guidelines.

                                                                                                                                       9

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
                     STATEMENT OF COMPATIBILITY WITH HUMAN RIGHTS

 Prepared in accordance with Part 3 of the Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011

   NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME (APPROVED QUALITY AUDITORS)
                                                     RULES 2025

   The National Disability Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality Auditors) Rules 2025 (the
Instrument) is compatible with the human rights and freedoms recognised or declared in the
international instruments listed in section 3 of the Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act

                                                          2011.

Overview of the Instrument

The Instrument sets out conditions and requirements governing the approval of an approved
quality auditor (AQA) under the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS), with the
purpose of promoting and safeguarding the quality and integrity of NDIS audits.

The Instrument, together with the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality
Auditors Scheme) Guidelines 2018 (AQA Guidelines), establishes the Approved Quality
Auditor Scheme (AQA Scheme). The AQA Scheme provides the framework for quality audits
under the NDIS and sets out requirements on AQAs when undertaking quality audits of
prospective and current registered NDIS providers.

The functions of the Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission
(Commissioner) include the approval of AQAs and oversight of the quality audits they
undertake under the National Disability Insurance Scheme 2013 (the Act). Quality audits
help to protect the rights and safety of people with disability by providing independent
assessments that help ensure that only providers who meet required NDIS Practice
Standards are registered as registered NDIS providers.

AQAs perform critical quality audit activities and make recommendations and findings to:

    · satisfy the requirement in paragraph 73E(1)(c) of the Act in determining an
         application for registration;

    · inform decisions about the ongoing registration of a registered NDIS provider, as well
         as their compliance with the NDIS Practice Standards; and

    · inform the NDIS Commission of quality and safeguarding risks in the NDIS market,
         including the capability of NDIS providers and their workforce to deliver quality and
         safe NDIS supports and services to people with disability.

The Instrument supports the effective operation of the NDIS by setting out the requirements
governing the approval of AQAs under the NDIS to enhance participant protection and
safeguard the quality and integrity of auditing within the NDIS.

Human rights implications

This Instrument engages the following human rights under international human rights law:

                                                                                                                                     10

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
    · Right to protection from exploitation, violence and abuse ­ article 20(2) of the
         International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and article 16(1) of the
         Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD);

    · Right to the highest attainable standard of health ­ article 12 of the International
         Covenant on Economic and Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and article 25 of
         the CRPD;

    · Right to an adequate standard of living ­ article 11 of the ICESCR and article 28 of
         the CRPD;

    · Right to social security ­ article 9 of the ICESCR and article 28 of the CRPD; and
    · Right to work ­ article 6 of ICESCR.

The Instrument seeks to protect and promote the rights of persons with disability by
strengthening the framework for approval of AQAs to enhance the quality and integrity of
NDIS audits. This will help ensure that only providers who meet required standards are
registered as registered NDIS providers which support people with disability to access
quality supports and services that support them to enjoy the highest attainable standard of
health, enjoy an adequate standard of living and to live free from exploitation, violence and
abuse.

The right to protection from exploitation, violence and abuse

Article 20(2) of the ICCPR and article 16(1) of the CRPD recognise the right to protection
from exploitation, violence and abuse. The CRPD also requires that positive measures be
taken to prevent exploitation, violence and abuse of persons with disabilities (article 16(2))
and that all facilities and programmes designed to serve persons with disability are
effectively monitored by independent authorities in order to prevent the occurrence of all
forms of exploitation, violence and abuse (article 16(3)).

Quality audits against the NDIS Practice Standards are an important mechanism for
providing protections for people with disability from the risk of exploitation, violence and
abuse in the course of NDIS support provision. AQAs perform a critical quality assurance
role by assessing whether NDIS providers meet quality expectations for the provision of
supports and services in the NDIS, including compliance with obligations relating to the
rights of people with disability.

The Instrument promotes the right to protection from exploitation, violence and abuse of
persons with disabilities as it sets out the requirements governing approval as an AQA to
ensure that only appropriately qualified and skilled individuals who meet integrity
requirements are authorised to conduct quality audits in the NDIS. This enhances participant
protection and the quality and integrity of auditing within the NDIS.

The right to health and right to an adequate standard of living

Articles 11 and 12 of the ICESCR and articles 25 and 28 of the CRPD recognise the rights of
persons with disabilities to an adequate standard of living and enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of health.

The Instrument engages the right to health and right to an adequate standard of living as the
suitability of AQAs directly affect the quality and safety of NDIS supports and services, which
in turn impacts on the health and safety of NDIS participants. AQAs play a key role in

                                                                                                                                     11

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
upholding the rights to health and an adequate standard of living by assessing whether NDIS
providers comply the NDIS Practice Standards, which cover participants rights.

The Instrument helps to promote the right to health and the right to an adequate standard of
living through strengthened requirements that AQAs must achieve and adhere to in order
to become and remain an AQA. Ensuring that quality audits in the NDIS are conducted by
qualified and skilled AQAs will help ensure that unsafe or substandard practices, which may
compromise NDIS participants' health and safety, do not go undetected.

The right to social security

Article 9 of the ICESCR recognises the right to social security and social insurance. Article
28 of the CRPD recognises the right of persons with disability to an adequate standard of
living for themselves and their families. Article 28(2) seeks to ensure equal access by
persons with disabilities to appropriate and affordable services, devices and other assistance
for disability-related needs.

The Instrument engages the right to social security as it supports the effective operation and
integrity of the NDIS. By strengthening the framework for approval of AQAs, this Instrument
ensures that only individuals meeting the strengthened integrity requirements are approved
as an AQA.

The Instrument promotes the right to social security by ensuring that audits are only
conducted by qualified and skilled AQAs, which in turn ensures that only providers who meet
required standards become registered NDIS providers and deliver supports and services in
the NDIS. This protects NDIS participants' ongoing access to the NDIS and promotes the
effective administration of the NDIS.

The right to work

Article 6 of ICESCR recognises the right of every person to the opportunity to gain a living by
work which they freely choose or accept. This right also applies to workers who work with
people with disability, including NDIS participants.

The right to work is engaged by section 10 of the Instrument which provides that the
approval of an AQA is subject to the condition that the AQA must not employ or engage as a
member of an audit team, or continue to employ or engage as a member of an audit team, a
person against whom a banning order has been made; or have, or continue to have, such a
person as a member of the AQA's key personnel.

Section 73U(5A) of the Act specifically authorises conditions that restrict the employment or
engagement of a person, against whom a banning order has been made, by an AQA and
require the AQA to not have, or continue to have, a person against whom a banning order
has been made as member of their key personnel.

The paramount objective of this instrument is to protect people with disability from
experiencing harm arising from unsafe supports or services under the NDIS. Consistent with
this objective, imposing a condition requiring an AQA not to employ or engage a person
against whom a banning order has been made helps prevent banned persons from being
able to move from the NDIS provider sector of the NDIS market system to the NDIS auditing
sector and continue to engage in activities that had them banned from the provider market.

                                                                                                                                     12

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
The instrument supports a proportionate approach to safeguards that does not
unduly prevent a person from choosing to work in the NDIS market but ensures the risk of
harm to people with disability is minimised by excluding individuals from working in NDIS
audits whose behavioural history indicates they pose a risk to NDIS services and supports.
To the extent that this condition on approval of an AQA limits a person's right to work, the
limitation is reasonable, necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective of protecting
the safety, rights and wellbeing of people with disability. NDIS audits play a central role in
maintaining the quality and integrity of NDIS supports and services. Ensuring that audits are
only conducted by qualified, skilled and ethical individuals is critical to safeguarding NDIS
participants and maintaining public confidence in the NDIS.
Conclusion
The National Disability Insurance Scheme (Approved Quality Auditors) Rules 2025 is
compatible with human rights because it advances the protection of the rights of people with
disability in Australia consistent with the CRPD. The Instrument forms part of an overall
legislative scheme designed to protect and promote the human rights of people with
disability by ensuring quality audits of NDIS providers are conducted by AQAs who are
suitably qualified and skilled. To the extent the Instrument impinges on the right to work, the
impositions are reasonable, necessary and proportionate to achieving the protection of the
rights and safety of people with disability and confidence in the quality and integrity of
auditing in the NDIS.

   Louise Glanville, Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission

                                                                                                                                     13

                                   Authorised Version Explanatory Statement registered 14/11/2025 to F2025L01383
