National Disability Insurance Scheme
(Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018
made under the

National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013




Compilation No. 1

Compilation date:          28 January 2026

Includes amendments: F2026N00063




Prepared by the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission




                        Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
About this compilation
This compilation
This is a compilation of the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness)
Guidelines 2018 that shows the text of the law as amended and in force on 28 January 2026
(the compilation date).
The notes at the end of this compilation (the endnotes) include information about amending
laws and the amendment history of provisions of the compiled law.
Uncommenced amendments
The effect of uncommenced amendments is not shown in the text of the compiled law. The
details of amendments made up to, but not commenced at, the compilation date are underlined
in the endnotes. Any uncommenced amendments affecting the law are accessible on the
Register (www.legislation.gov.au).
Application, saving and transitional provisions
If the operation of a provision or amendment of the compiled law is affected by an
application, saving or transitional provision that is not included in this compilation, details are
included in the endnotes.
Modifications
If the compiled law is modified by another law, the compiled law operates as modified but the
modification does not amend the text of the law. Accordingly, this compilation does not show
the text of the compiled law as modified. Any modifications affecting the law are accessible
on the Register.
Self-repealing provisions
If a provision of the compiled law has been repealed in accordance with a provision of the
law, details are included in the endnotes.




                            Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
Contents
               Introduction .............................................................................................................................................1
               Part 1 – Preliminary ................................................................................................................................2
               1 Name ...................................................................................................................................................2
               3 Authority .............................................................................................................................................2
               4 Definitions...........................................................................................................................................2
               5 Interpretation .......................................................................................................................................3
               Part 2 – Procedural fairness and NDIS complaint handling ...................................................................3
               6         Application of this instrument ......................................................................................................3
               7         An outline of procedural fairness .................................................................................................3
               8         Procedural fairness and other legal requirements.........................................................................5
               9         NDIS principles and objectives ....................................................................................................5
               10        How procedural fairness applies to NDIS complaint handling ....................................................6
               Part 3 – Key elements of procedural fairness..........................................................................................8
               11        Procedural fairness steps – an illustrative summary ....................................................................8
               12        Procedural fairness steps in dealing with a complaint that alleges inappropriate conduct by a
                         worker...........................................................................................................................................9
               13        Procedural fairness – practical considerations ...........................................................................12
               14        Dealing with confidential information .......................................................................................13
               15        Maintaining an impartial and unbiased appearance ...................................................................14
Endnotes .....................................................................................................................................................................15
  Endnote 1—About the endnotes ........................................................................................................................15
  Endnote 2—Abbreviation key............................................................................................................................16
  Endnote 3—Legislation history..........................................................................................................................17
  Endnote 4—Amendment history .......................................................................................................................18




                                          National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                                                           i

Compilation No. 1                                                                                                                      Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                                                 Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
Introduction
The National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013 provides that the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (NDIS) Quality and Safeguards Commission has complaints functions
which are described in section 181G of the Act.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme (Complaints Management and Resolution) Rules
2018 set out the complaint handling obligations of registered NDIS providers and the
Commission. The Complaint Rules require registered NDIS providers to have complaints
management arrangements in place and to support people with disability to understand how to
make a complaint to the provider and the Commission.
The Commission is responsible for supporting the resolution of complaints about the
provision of supports and services by all NDIS providers (not just those that are registered) by
undertaking a risk assessment to prioritise complaints having regard to:
        (a) the impact of the complaint on the human rights and health, safety or wellbeing
             of participants; and
        (b) whether the complaint relates to a contravention of the legislation underpinning
             the NDIS by an NDIS provider or worker, including whether the contravention is
             repeated or serious; and
        (c) whether an issue raised in the complaint is a strategic priority or emerging risk
             for the Commission.
All NDIS providers and their workers are obliged to comply with the NDIS Code of Conduct:
https://www.ndiscommission.gov.au/providers/ndis-code-conduct
Complaints can play an important role in strengthening the NDIS and driving improvements
in the quality of NDIS supports and services. Complaints provide a source of intelligence to
the Commission and can highlight weaknesses in service provision, unmet expectations and
misunderstandings. A person’s right to complain is also important to ensure that possible
problems in NDIS service provision are identified and addressed at the earliest opportunity.
These broader benefits of complaints management can only be met if people have confidence
that complaints will be handled and resolved fairly, impartially and efficiently. The Complaint
Rules require the Commission and NDIS providers to have proper regard to procedural
fairness requirements in managing complaints (ss 9, 30). These guidelines support that
requirement.




                       National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                 1

Compilation No. 1                                                                       Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                            Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
Part 1 – Preliminary
1 Name
                This instrument is the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural
                Fairness) Guidelines 2018.

3 Authority
                This instrument is made under subsection 181D(2) of the National Disability
                Insurance Scheme Act 2013 and section 9 of the National Disability Insurance
                Scheme (Complaints Management and Resolution) Rules 2018.
                Note 1:   Section 181D sets out the functions of the Commission, and relevantly provides that
                          the Commissioner must have due regard to procedural fairness in performing his or her
                          functions (subsection 181D(3B)).
                Note 2:   Section 9 of the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Complaints Management and
                          Resolution) Rules 2018 provides that the Commission may, by notifiable instrument,
                          make guidelines relating to procedural fairness for the purpose of complaints
                          management and resolution system requirements for registered NDIS providers.


4 Definitions
                Note:     A number of expressions used in this instrument are defined in section 9 of the Act,
                          including the following:
                          (a) Commissioner;
                          (b) National Disability Insurance Scheme rules;
                          (c) Commission;
                          (d) NDIS provider;
                          (e) nominee;
                          (f) participant;
                          (g) registered NDIS provider;
                          (h) restrictive practice.

                In this instrument:
                Act means the National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013.
                Complainant means a person who has made a complaint under the Complaint
                Rules to an NDIS provider or the Commission.
                Complaint Rules means the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Complaints
                Management and Resolution) Rules 2018.
                Investigation in the context of the Commission’s complaints functions means an
                investigation conducted under Part 3 of the Regulatory Powers (Standard
                Provisions) Act 2011 (see section 73ZF of the Act).
                Worker means a person employed or otherwise engaged by a NDIS provider.




2                         National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                          Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                               Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
5 Interpretation
          A reference in this instrument to a provider includes a reference to a person who is
          applying to become a registered NDIS provider under section 73C of the Act.

Part 2 – Procedural fairness and NDIS complaint handling
6    Application of this instrument

     (1) This instrument applies to the Commission’s complaints functions under section
         181G of the Act in determining whether an NDIS provider or worker has contravened
         the Act or National Disability Insurance Scheme rules.

    (2) This instrument applies to all NDIS providers who have obligations under the NDIS
        Code of Conduct to promptly take steps to raise and act on concerns about matters
        that may impact the quality and safety of supports and services provided to people
        with disability. NDIS providers should operate effective complaints, resolution,
        incident management, investigation and disciplinary processes, and meet relevant
        NDIS Commission reporting requirements. NDIS providers should also foster an
        environment in which people feel safe to make a complaint or provide negative
        feedback without fear of retribution. NDIS providers should guarantee procedural
        fairness principles will be applied throughout the complaints process.

    (3) This instrument also applies to complaint handling by a registered NDIS provider
        under the Complaint Rules. Registered NDIS providers are required to have a
        complaints management and resolution system that both:

           (a) supports people with disability to understand how to make a complaint to the
               provider and to the Commission; and

           (b) requires that people are afforded procedural fairness when a complaint is dealt
               with by the provider.

    (4) Effective complaint management and resolution by NDIS providers and the
        Commission is important to a range of people and organisations, including
        complainants and NDIS providers and workers against whom complaints are made.
        They all have a direct interest in the complaint process being conducted properly and
        fairly.

    (5) Procedural fairness compliance by the Commission and NDIS providers is integral to
        building confidence in NDIS complaint processes.

7    An outline of procedural fairness
     (1) As part of the handling of a complaint under the Complaint Rules, procedural fairness
         must be afforded to a person if their rights or interests may be adversely or


                        National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                 3

Compilation No. 1                                                                        Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                             Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
          detrimentally affected in a direct and specific way. In those circumstances -

          (a) the person must be given notice of each prejudicial matter that may be considered
              against them;

          (b) the person must be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard on those matters
              before adverse action is taken, and to put forward information and submissions in
              support of an outcome that is favourable to their interests;

          (c) the decision to take adverse action should be soundly based on the facts and
              issues that were raised during that process, and this should be apparent in the
              record of the decision, and

          (d) the decision maker should be unbiased and maintain an unbiased appearance.
     (2) The precise requirements of procedural fairness can vary from one situation to
         another. The required steps can vary according to:
          (a) the nature of the matter being dealt with;

          (b) the options for resolving it;

          (c) the time-frame for resolution;

          (d) whether facts in issue are in dispute;

          (e) the gravity of possible findings that may be reached; and

          (f) the sanctions that could be imposed based on those findings.
     (3) Sometimes a quick, informal and consultative procedure will be sufficient – but on
         other occasions procedural fairness may require a more formal, structured or arms-
         length procedure. A more formal procedure may be required if a complaint involves
         direct criticism of or an allegation against a worker, or consideration is being given to
         imposing a sanction on an NDIS provider or worker. Even in those situations,
         procedural fairness does not preclude the adoption initially of an informal and
         consultative process that can become more formal at the request of a party or if
         circumstances require. A transparent procedure should be adopted that ensures that
         any person whose interests may be directly and adversely affected by a complaint
         process is given the opportunity to have their views heard and considered in a fair and
         impartial manner.
     (4) The obligation to provide procedural fairness must be balanced against the need to
         ensure that neither a complainant (including a person with disability) nor a person
         with disability affected by an issue raised in a complaint is disadvantaged as a result
         of the complaint being made and resolved. The steps adopted to ensure procedural
         fairness in any situation must be tailored to ensure that disadvantage is not suffered
         by the complainant or person with disability.




4                        National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                         Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                              Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
        (5) Procedures developed by a registered NDIS provider as part of its complaints
            management and resolutions system must take into account the elements of, and
            approach to, procedural fairness described in this instrument.
Note:                  A complaints management and resolution system must be appropriate for the registered
                       NDIS provider’s size and the classes of supports or services provided – see Part 2,
                       Complaint Rules.


 8      Procedural fairness and other legal requirements
        (1) The Act and the Complaint Rules outline procedural steps that must be followed by
            registered NDIS providers and the Commission in complaint handling. The central
            purpose of those requirements is to ensure fairness for all involved parties.
            Compliance with those steps will go a long way towards meeting procedural fairness
            legal requirements.
        (2) It is important that the specific requirements of the Act and the National Disability
            Insurance Scheme rules are followed, in addition to procedural fairness requirements.
        (3) Other laws such as the Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) contain protections for workers in
            relation to adverse employment action. Consideration may need to be given to the
            requirements of other laws in addition to procedural fairness requirements.

 9      NDIS principles and objectives

        (1) The Act outlines the principles and objectives that guide the NDIS scheme generally,
            and complaint handling in particular. Those principles and objectives are relevant in
            deciding how procedural fairness requirements apply in particular circumstances, as
            the following examples illustrate:

            (a) The objects of the Act include that people with disability have the same rights as
                other members of Australian society to pursue grievances and to be involved in
                decision making that affects them. To meet that objective when dealing with a
                complaint made on behalf of a person with disability, a NDIS provider or the
                Commission should, if necessary, consider taking separate procedural fairness
                steps in relation to both the person making the complaint and the person with
                disability.

            (b) The Complaint Rules require the Commission in dealing with the complaint to
                seek to resolve complaints as quickly and with as little formality as a proper
                consideration of the complaint allows (paragraph 16(5)(c)).

            (c) The Complaint Rules allow that complaints to registered NDIS providers and the
                Commission may be made anonymously and that a complainant may request that
                information be kept confidential (subsections 8(1) and 15(3)). This is relevant in
                deciding the nature of the information to be disclosed to a provider or worker for
                the purposes of a procedural fairness hearing. The Complaint Rules equally
                acknowledge that it may not always be possible to fully honour a request for
                confidentiality if a complaint is to be properly investigated.



                          National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                 5

 Compilation No. 1                                                                         Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                               Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
          (d) The NDIS Code of Conduct requires providers (whether registered or not) and
              workers to act with respect for individuals and to respond to allegations of abuse.
              It may accordingly be necessary in resolving a complaint to reach a finding that is
              adverse to an individual worker or that results in a sanction being imposed. A fair
              process should be followed in reaching that adverse outcome, but procedural
              fairness does not preclude it.

10 How procedural fairness applies to NDIS complaint handling
     (1) This section contains brief examples and discussion of where the obligation to
         observe procedural fairness in NDIS complaint handling is likely to arise.
    (2) A complaint to a registered NDIS provider about the supports or services being
        provided to a person with disability: A registered NDIS provider must afford
        procedural fairness to a person making a complaint, as that person has an interest (and
        possibly an expectation) in how the complaint is managed and the outcome.
    (3) Procedural fairness requires only that the complainant has a reasonable opportunity to
        present their complaint, that the substance of their complaint is understood and their
        complaint is not dismissed on a view of the facts that was not raised with or apparent
        to them. If the complaint is made by a representative on behalf of a person with
        disability, consideration should be given to separately providing procedural fairness
        to the person with disability.
    (4) A complaint to a registered NDIS provider that alleges inappropriate behaviour by
        a person who is identified: Procedural fairness must be provided to any worker who
        is the specific subject of a complaint.
    (5) Not every complaint to a registered NDIS provider will make adverse allegations,
        directly or implicitly, against an identifiable individual. Many complaints may instead
        be about the quality or level of supports or services provided by the provider or
        available to the person with disability. In those circumstances there is no obligation to
        afford procedural fairness to individual workers, unless a possible outcome of the
        investigation is that a worker will be identified as being at fault.
    (6) A registered NDIS provider should ensure that its complaints management and
        resolution system distinguishes between complaints that are specifically about the
        conduct of identifiable workers and complaints about the provision of supports and
        services that incidentally identify workers.




6                       National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                        Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                             Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
    (7) A complaint to the Commission about an NDIS provider: The Complaint Rules
        provide that a person may complain to the Commission about the provision of
        supports or services by an NDIS provider (whether or not the provider is registered)
        (section 15). In relation to the complaint, the Commission is required to undertake a
        risk assessment to prioritise the complaint having regard to the impact of the
        complaint on the human rights and health, safety or wellbeing of participants;
        whether the complaint relates to a contravention of the legislation underpinning the
        NDIS by an NDIS provider or worker, including whether the contravention is
        repeated or serious; and whether an issue raised in the complaint is a strategic priority
        or emerging risk for the Commission (subsection 16(2A)). Having regard to the risk
        assessment undertaken in relation to the complaint, the Commission must decide to
        take action in relation to the complaint or each issue raised in a complaint. The
        actions that can be taken are set out in the Complaint Rules (subsection 16(3)), and
        include the following options: close the complaint or issue on the basis that section 17
        applies to the complaint or issue (for example, if it has already been dealt with); give
        assistance and advice to the complainant, a person with disability affected by the
        complaint or issue and the NDIS provider to which the complaint or issue relates;
        require the NDIS provider to take certain actions in relation to the complaint or issue,
        including to examine and address the complaint or issue; and requesting the parties to
        participate in a resolution process.
    (8) The Complaint Rules specify processes that the Commission may follow in deciding
        what action to take (subsection 16(4)) – for example, consulting with the NDIS
        provider and the complainant, reviewing documents and visiting the location at which
        supports or services are provided. In most instances those processes will adequately
        satisfy procedural fairness requirements.
    (9) In some instances the Commission may need to take additional procedural fairness
        steps, particularly if its complaint handling process could result in adverse action
        taken against a provider or adverse employment action being recorded against a
        worker. An example of an additional step is the disclosure of specific information to
        the provider as part of a formal invitation to make a submission. The core issue is
        whether there is a matter on which the provider can reasonably expect to be heard
        before action is taken by the Commission that could be regarded as adverse to the
        provider.
    (10) A complaint to the Commission that could result in an adverse finding against a
         worker: The Commission is not generally required to undertake a separate procedural
         fairness process in relation to workers of an NDIS provider in handling complaints
         about the provider’s supports or services. Even if workers are incidentally identified
         in the complaint to the Commission, the provider can decide which workers to consult
         after being notified of the complaint by the Commission.
    (11) The Commission will need to consider undertaking a separate procedural fairness
         process in relation to a person employed or otherwise engaged by an NDIS provide
         against whom an adverse finding may be made by the Commission. This is
         recognised in paragraph 16(5)(b) of the Complaint Rules which provides that in
         dealing with a complaint the Commission must consider whether procedural fairness
         requires ‘allowing a worker reasonable opportunity to comment on any proposed



                       National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                 7

Compilation No. 1                                                                       Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                            Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
          adverse finding in relation to the person’. The procedural fairness process can be
          confined to the possible adverse finding and need not canvass other issues.
     (12) The NDIS provider would ordinarily be informed that a separate procedural fairness
          process was being undertaken with a worker, but not told of any provisional adverse
          finding. This allows the worker to make an effective submission that the provisional
          adverse finding should not be adopted. The final report by the Commission to the
          provider may nevertheless discuss the issue or allegation in another way in order to
          explain how the complaint was resolved.
     (13) A decision by the Commission to initiate an inquiry: The Commission may initiate
          an inquiry either independently of any complaint or in relation to issues that arise
          from complaints against a provider or complaints against more than one provider
          (section 29 of the Complaint Rules). A Commission decision to conduct an own
          motion inquiry potentially exposes a provider to reputational disadvantage if the fact
          of the inquiry becomes publicly known. Accordingly, it is generally prudent to
          provide advance notice of an inquiry to a provider that may be individually targeted
          or affected by the inquiry.
     (14) The Commission decides the terms of reference for an inquiry. Procedural fairness
          does not require that a provider is given a reasonable opportunity to comment on the
          draft terms of reference – but it can be prudent administrative practice to do so in
          order to focus the inquiry on relevant and specific matters. This step may be less
          appropriate if a large number of providers fall within the scope of the inquiry and
          each is no more specifically affected than other providers.
     (15) During the conduct of the inquiry there will be a need to take procedural fairness
          steps in relation to any provisional adverse finding against an individual provider,
          worker or other person. This is particularly important if the Commission may publish
          a report that sets out the adverse finding (subsection 29(6) of the Complaint Rules).
     (16) A referral by the Commission of an issue raised in a complaint to the Minister, the
          Agency or another person or body: A Commission decision to refer a complaint
          issue to another organisation under section 31 of the Complaint Rules may expose a
          provider to disadvantage – for example, if the matter referred involves an allegation
          against the provider, or the referral may lead to a separate inquiry by that other
          organisation into the actions of the provider.
     (17) It is generally prudent to advise a provider in advance that a referral is being made, to
          alert it to any possible disadvantage. It is not usually necessary to invite the provider
          to make a submission before the referral occurs, as the obligation to afford procedural
          fairness will apply to the other entity if it decides to take action on the referral.

Part 3 – Key elements of procedural fairness
11 Procedural fairness steps – an illustrative summary
    (1)   NDIS providers and the Commission must have regard to procedural fairness
          obligations in a range of different circumstances that are noted above. The nature of
          the procedural fairness obligation can vary in each situation.


8                        National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                         Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                              Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
  (2)     The following summary illustrates the procedural fairness steps that may need to be
          taken in one typical situation - when a registered NDIS provider has received a
          complaint that alleges inappropriate behaviour by a worker.

12 Procedural fairness steps in dealing with a complaint that alleges
   inappropriate conduct by a worker
(1)       A registered NDIS provider that is intending to investigate or act upon a complaint it
          has received that expressly or implicitly alleges inappropriate conduct by a worker
          should have regard to the following procedural fairness steps:
          (a) Identify whether any information that may be taken into account in resolving the
              complaint was provided on a confidential basis or may be confidential in nature,
              and if so –
                       i. consider how confidentiality can be maintained consistently with
                          affording procedural fairness to the worker, and
                      ii. if it may be difficult practically to maintain confidentiality in
                          resolving the complaint, consult with the person who provided the
                          information to inform them of this difficulty and ascertain if they
                          wish the complaint to proceed.
          (b) Identify if the allegation relates to the behaviour of more than worker, and
              whether the same (or different) procedural fairness steps should apply to each
              worker.

          (c) Consider who is an appropriate person within the registered NDIS provider’s
              organisation to manage the complaint, and whether more than one person should
              discharge the role of examining the complaint, consulting with interested parties,
              ensuring that procedural fairness is provided to the worker, and making a decision
              on the complaint. More than one person may manage the complaint for
              organisational reasons or to avoid conflicts of interest or the appearance of bias.

          (d) Identify the training, policies, procedures and any other relevant systems of work
              provided to the worker in the context of the supports or services in which the
              allegation arose.

          (e) Determine an appropriate process for managing the complaint, having regard to
              the matters considered in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), and aspects of this
              instrument.

          (f) Inform the worker of the issue to be investigated, and the allegation(s) made
              against the worker. There is no formal requirement as to how the notice is to be
              given or the issues are to be framed – though the prudent course is to give notice
              in writing if the matters or potential sanctions under consideration are serious in
              nature.




                        National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                 9

Compilation No. 1                                                                        Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                             Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
          (g) Inform the worker how the matter will be investigated, including who is
              conducting the investigation, how long it is expected to take, and how the
              investigation will be reported.

          (h) Adequate details of any allegation should be given to enable the worker to
              respond in a constructive manner – for example, tell the worker what they are
              alleged to have done or omitted to do, when the incident occurred, and of any
              evidence that tends to confirm the allegation. Draw the worker’s attention to any
              issue that may be critical to the outcome but which may not be apparent to them.
              It is not generally necessary to identify who made the allegation, though this may
              be unavoidable in providing other details.

          (i) It is not generally necessary to give the worker access to records relating to the
              complaint – providing them with a summary of the information that may be relied
              on in reaching a decision is usually sufficient. Depending on the nature of an
              allegation it may be necessary to allow a person to inspect a document or to listen
              to or view an audio-visual recording that may be taken into account.

          (j) The decision maker or person conducting the inquiry or investigation is not
              required to notify their provisional views or tentative findings. However, it can
              enhance the fairness of a process to alert a person to a perceived deficiency or
              inconsistency in their submission.
  (2)     Inform the worker of any potential sanction that may be imposed.
          (a) A sanction may be formal in nature (such as dismissal or an investigation into an
              alleged contravention of the Code of Conduct) or be an adverse consequence of a
              different kind (for example, work restrictions, or publication of an investigation
              report that reflects adversely on the worker’s performance).

          (b) The notice to the worker should identify considerations that may be relevant to
              deciding on a sanction to be imposed. This is particularly important if a harsh
              sanction such as dismissal or reduction in salary is a possibility.

          (c) It may be desirable to conduct a separate hearing or procedure to decide on a
              sanction, to ensure fairness to the worker and to remove any appearance of bias.
  (3)     Give the worker a reasonable opportunity to respond to the issue to be investigated,
          the allegation(s) against the worker and possible sanctions.
          (a) What will be a ‘reasonable opportunity’ will depend on the circumstances. Many
              issues can be dealt with quickly – by discussion or allowing the worker a few
              days to prepare a response. Other issues may require a longer period for the
              worker to consult others, obtain information or prepare a more extended response.
              The central requirement is that the worker should have a reasonable opportunity
              to comment upon or rebut adverse or prejudicial material and to put forward
              information and submissions in support of a favourable outcome.




10                      National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                        Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                             Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
          (b) It is good practice to allow the worker to choose how they will respond – for
              example, a face-to-face interview or meeting to discuss the issue, a written
              submission, or a meeting at which the worker is accompanied by a support person
              that could be a colleague, a family member, or a representative (see paragraph (c)
              below).

          (c) A worker may choose to consult a lawyer or union official in preparing a
              statement, and obtain advice about what they intend to say in making a verbal
              submission. The person may have the union official or lawyer attend a meeting as
              their support person or representative respectively.

          (d) It may be necessary to allow a person to make more than one statement or
              submission before a final decision is made. For example, it may transpire at a
              meeting that some disputed matters cannot fairly be resolved without a further
              statement or evidence. Equally, if a harsh sanction is to be imposed it may be
              desirable to split the hearing into two stages – an initial finding on the complaint
              allegation, followed by a decision on the sanction to be imposed.

          (e) Special measures may be required to ensure that a person has a reasonable
              opportunity to respond – such as use of an interpreter, conducting an
              interview/hearing at a separate location, or agreeing to a worker’s request
              (supported by reasons) for an extension of time or adjournment.
  (4)     Inform the worker in writing of the decision that has been made following the
          investigation.
          (a) A written record of the decision is important to ensure clarity and certainty, and
              to enable the worker to decide whether to follow up.

          (b) The written form can vary according to the circumstances. For example, a formal
              letter of advice should be used to notify an adverse decision that could be
              distressing to a worker or impair their career. In other circumstances – including
              if a decision is favourable to a worker – it may be sufficient to notify the decision
              by email, or to invite the worker to sign/initial a written record of the decision.

          (c) If a sanction is imposed on a worker (including an adverse finding recorded on
              their personnel record) the nature of the sanction should be clearly stated. If the
              worker has a right to challenge or review the sanction, the procedure for doing so
              should be outlined.
  (5)     Ensure that the investigation of the complaint or allegation is conducted in a fair and
          unbiased manner.
          (a) A transparent process should be followed that gives a worker a reasonable
              opportunity to present their views on all relevant issues.

          (b) The person conducting the investigation should do so with an open mind and
              avoid forming a view on whether to sustain a complaint allegation against a
              worker before the investigation is complete.


                         National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                11

Compilation No. 1                                                                         Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                              Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
          (c) Consider whether any decision to impose a sanction should be made separately
              by someone other than the person who conducted the investigation, to avoid any
              appearance of prejudice or prejudgement at this stage.

13 Procedural fairness – practical considerations
  (1)     Fair process: Procedural fairness requirements aim to ensure that a fair process is
          followed in decision making that could adversely or detrimentally affect the rights or
          interests of a person. The underlying assumption is that a fair process will lead to
          better decision-making – and, in this context, better and fairer complaint handling.
          However, procedural fairness requirements stop short of assessing whether a
          particular decision or outcome is fair: they address the process to be followed in
          reaching a decision, but not the substantive merits of that decision.
  (2)     Fair process overall: The obligation to afford procedural fairness applies to the
          overall process of making a decision or resolving a complaint, and not separately to
          each stage in that process. A person should be given a reasonable and informed
          opportunity to comment on any adverse finding or sanction before it is finally
          determined. The precise point in the process at which that opportunity is given can be
          of secondary importance.
  (3)     An illustration of that principle is that there is generally no procedural fairness
          obligation to notify a person of an adverse allegation or potential finding when a
          complaint is first recorded or referred to another body. A reasonable opportunity to
          comment on the allegation or potential finding can be given at a later stage. This
          enables appropriate analysis of a complaint to determine if it should be managed as a
          complaint about the level or quality of services or supports that a person with
          disability is receiving, rather than an allegation of inappropriate conduct by a worker.
  (4)     A person who is facing a potential adverse finding or sanction should be reassured as
          necessary that the overall process will be fair. Equally, a deficiency at an early stage
          of the process can be corrected at a later stage, provided this is done by a good faith
          process in which the decision maker approaches the issue with an open mind and
          gives genuine consideration to any submission made by the person to whom
          procedural fairness is owed.
  (5)     The dual purpose of procedural fairness: Procedural fairness is a legal obligation
          that applies to decisions made under statute that adversely affect the interests of
          others in a direct and specific manner. A failure to comply with this legal obligation
          may lead to an adverse decision being set aside by a court or questioned by a review
          tribunal or body.
  (6)     As importantly, procedural fairness aims to strengthen the fairness and integrity of
          administrative processes, regardless of whether legal proceedings for a breach are a
          possibility. Decision-makers should, accordingly, ensure procedural fairness in the
          pursuit of good administration as an overriding objective.




12                      National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                        Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                             Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
14 Dealing with confidential information
     (1) Information to be considered in a complaint management and resolution process may
         have been received on a confidential basis. For example, a complainant, informant,
         witness or whistleblower may request that their identity remain confidential, or
         private personal information about a third party may be revealed during an
         investigation.
  (2)     The Complaint Rules (paragraph 8(4)(b)) require that a registered NDIS provider’s
          complaints management and resolution system ensures that information provided in a
          complaint is kept confidential, and only disclosed if the disclosure is:
          (a) required by law; or

          (b) is otherwise appropriate in the circumstances.
  (3)     Procedural fairness principles recognise that protection of identity and confidentiality
          can be important elements of effective complaint handling and dispute resolution.
          This must nevertheless be balanced against the obligation to provide procedural
          fairness to a person whose interests may be adversely affected by an administrative
          action, particularly if a sanction may be imposed on a person as part of the resolution
          of a complaint or allegation.
  (4)     This means that the obligation to provide procedural fairness may override – in whole
          or in part - the obligation to maintain confidentiality, depending on the circumstances.
  (5)     Confidentiality can more easily be safeguarded if a complaint is classified as one
          about the quality or level of supports provided to a person with disability, rather than
          a complaint that alleges inappropriate conduct by a worker. Accordingly, a NDIS
          provider should consider at the outset whether any worker who is identified in a
          complaint is identified only in a manner incidental to describing a complaint issue
          about the quality or level of supports.
  (6)     Where a complaint involves allegations about the conduct of a worker, it may be
          practicable to provide the worker with the allegation and the details given in support
          of it, without disclosing the identity of the source of any prejudicial information. This
          may not be possible if, for example, the identity of the source of information will be
          readily apparent from the nature of the allegation. Sometimes, too, fairness may
          require that a source of information is revealed, so that the worker can better
          understand how to comment upon or rebut that information. Generally, disclosure is
          required to a level necessary to avoid any practical injustice to a person to whom
          procedural fairness is owed.
  (7)     The decision maker or person conducting the inquiry or investigation should look for
          ways of balancing fairness and confidentiality and effectively safeguarding the
          interests of all parties. It may be desirable to conduct a separate preliminary
          discussion with each of the interested parties, so they may offer suggestions or make
          undertakings that ensure an appropriate balance can be struck.




                        National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                13

Compilation No. 1                                                                        Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                             Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
15 Maintaining an impartial and unbiased appearance
  (1)     A decision maker should be impartial and free of actual or apprehended bias. The test
          for apprehended bias is whether a fair-minded observer might reasonably suspect that
          the decision maker is not impartial.
  (2)     Apprehended bias can be inferred from a person’s conduct, comments, associations or
          other relevant circumstances. Examples of apprehended bias can include situations in
          which a decision maker (or person conducting an inquiry) -
               (a) has a conflict of interest or personal stake in the matter to be resolved, or a
                   relationship with one of the parties that casts doubt on the appearance of
                   fairness
               (b) displayed hostility or favouritism to one of the parties involved in a matter
               (c) made comments that suggest the decision maker has prejudged a disputed
                   issue and will not approach the evidence with an open mind
               (d) was involved at an earlier stage of the process, for example, in making the
                   allegation to be investigated or providing a statement in support of one of the
                   parties.
  (3)     Actual or apprehended bias of a decision maker can undermine both the integrity and
          legal validity of the decision making process and outcome. The responsibility rests on
          the decision maker to ensure there is no actual or apprehended bias, and if necessary
          to withdraw from the process and assign the decision making responsibility to another
          person. If that is not practical (for example, it is a small organisation) another option
          is to outsource the inquiry/assessment role to an external professional to prepare a
          report for the decision maker. A NDIS provider has flexibility in deciding how to deal
          with bias and conflict of interest concerns.
  (4)     It is good practice to clarify bias and conflict of interest concerns before the process
          commences. It is open to the parties, once informed of a potential issue, to waive any
          objection and to allow the decision maker to continue. On the other hand, a decision
          maker should not withdraw merely because one of the parties raises a bias objection:
          the test of the ‘fair-minded observer’ should be followed. It is common that decision
          makers will know or work with one or other of the parties, have some familiarity with
          the issues to be decided, or have expressed a preliminary view on or more of those
          issues.
  (5)     If a bias issue arises during the course of an inquiry after evidence and submissions
          have already been collected, these can generally be made available to the new
          inquirer/decision maker, subject to ensuring procedural fairness. It is good practice to
          consult the parties about this option before doing so.




14                       National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                         Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                              Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
                                                                                                        Endnotes


                                                                          Endnote 1—About the endnotes


Endnotes
Endnote 1—About the endnotes
The endnotes provide information about this compilation and the compiled law.
The following endnotes are included in every compilation:
Endnote 1—About the endnotes
Endnote 2—Abbreviation key
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Abbreviation key—Endnote 2
The abbreviation key sets out abbreviations that may be used in the endnotes.
Legislation history and amendment history—Endnotes 3 and 4
Amending laws are annotated in the legislation history and amendment history.
The legislation history in endnote 3 provides information about each law that has amended (or
will amend) the compiled law. The information includes commencement details for amending
laws and details of any application, saving or transitional provisions that are not included in
this compilation.
The amendment history in endnote 4 provides information about amendments at the provision
(generally section or equivalent) level. It also includes information about any provision of the
compiled law that has been repealed in accordance with a provision of the law.
Misdescribed amendments
A misdescribed amendment is an amendment that does not accurately describe how an
amendment is to be made. If, despite the misdescription, the amendment can be given effect
as intended, then the misdescribed amendment can be incorporated through an editorial
change made under section 15V of the Legislation Act 2003.
If a misdescribed amendment cannot be given effect as intended, the amendment is not
incorporated and “(md not incorp)” is added to the amendment history.




                       National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                15

Compilation No. 1                                                                       Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                            Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
Endnotes


Endnote 2—Abbreviation key

Endnote 2—Abbreviation key

  ad = added or inserted                                      orig = original
  am = amended                                                p = page(s)
  amdt = amendment                                            para = paragraph(s)/subparagraph(s)
  C[x] = Compilation No. x                                       /sub-subparagraph(s)
  ch = Chapter(s)                                             pres = present
  cl = clause(s)                                              prev = previous
  cont. = continued                                           (prev…) = previously
  def = definition(s)                                         pt = Part(s)
  Dict = Dictionary                                           r = regulation(s)/Court rule(s)
  disallowed = disallowed by Parliament                       reloc = relocated
  div = Division(s)                                           renum = renumbered
  exp = expires/expired or ceases/ceased to have              rep = repealed
     effect                                                   rs = repealed and substituted
  gaz = gazette                                               s = section(s)/subsection(s)
  LA = Legislation Act 2003                                      /rule(s)/subrule(s)/order(s)/suborder(s)
  LIA = Legislative Instruments Act 2003                      sch = Schedule(s)
  (md not incorp) = misdescribed amendment                    SLI = Select Legislative Instrument
    cannot be given effect                                    SR = Statutory Rules
  mod = modified/modification                                 sub ch = Sub-Chapter(s)
  No. = Number(s)                                             sub div = Subdivision(s)
  Ord = Ordinance                                             sub pt = Subpart(s)
                                                              underlining = whole or part not
                                                                commenced or to be commenced




16                         National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                           Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                                Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
                                                                                                             Endnotes


                                                                                Endnote 3—Legislation history

Endnote 3—Legislation history

 Name                              Registration                  Commencement                 Application, saving
                                                                                              and transitional
                                                                                              provisions

 National Disability Insurance     28 September 2018             29 September 2018 (s 2)      —
 Scheme (Procedural Fairness)      (F2018N00155)
 Guidelines 2018
 National Disability Insurance     27 January 2026               28 January 2026 (s 2)        —
 Scheme (Procedural Fairness)      (F2026N00063)
 Amendment (Consequential
 Amendments) Guidelines 2026




                            National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018                17

Compilation No. 1                                                                            Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                                 Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
Endnotes


Endnote 4—Amendment history

Endnote 4—Amendment history

 Provision affected            How affected

 s2                            rep LA s 48D
 Part 1
 s4                            am F2026N00063
 Part 2
 s6                            am F2026N00063
 s9                            am F2026N00063
 s 10                          am F2026N00063
 Part 3
 s 11                          am F2026N00063
 s 14                          am F2026N00063
 s 15                          am F2026N00063




18                    National Disability Insurance Scheme (Procedural Fairness) Guidelines 2018

Compilation No. 1                                                                      Compilation date: 28/01/2026



                           Authorised Version F2026C00166 registered 26/02/2026
